Report for my GSoD'20 project: Update how the Kubernetes website serves API references (#25404)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2020-12-04-gsod-2020-improving-api-reference-experience.md

---
layout: blog

> title: "GSoD 2020: Improving API Reference experience"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "GSoD 2020: Improving the API Reference Experience"
```

I was selected by the CNCF organization to work on the Kubernetes documentation, specifically on the subject of making the API Reference documentation more accessible.

I'm a software developer, with a great interest in documentation systems. At the end of the 90's, I wanted to invest my time in the Linux community and started translating Linux-HOWTO documents. From one thing to another, I learned about documentation systems and finally wrote a Linux-HOWTO, to help document writers learn the language used at this time for writing documents, LinuxDoc/SGML.

Shortly after, the DocBook language was adopted to write the Linux Documentation. I helped some writers rewrite their documents in this format, for example the Advanced Bash-Scripting Guide. I also worked on the GNU `makeinfo` program to add the DocBook output, making possible to transform *GNU Info* documentation into Docbook. 

# Background

The [Kubernetes documentation website](https://kubernetes.io/docs/home/) is built with Hugo from documentation written in Markdown format in the [website repository](https://github.com/kubernetes/website), using the [Docsy Hugo theme](https://www.docsy.dev/about/).

> The API reference documentation is a large HTML file generated from the Swagger specifications of the API, added to the content of the website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The existing API reference documentation is a large HTML file generated from the Swagger specifications of the API, added to the content of the website.
```

Because the Kubernetes API is much larger than many other APIs, it has been necessary to write a tool to split the complete API Reference by API Groups, and insert in the Documentation website several `swagger-ui` components, one for each API Group.

Generally, APIs are used by developers by calling endpoints with a specific HTTP verb, with specific parameters and waiting for a response. The `swagger-ui` interface is built for this usage: the interface displays a list of endpoints and their associated verbs, and for each the parameters and responses formats. 

The Kubernetes API is most of the time used differently: users create manifest files containing resources definitions in YAML format, and use the `kubectl` CLI to *apply* these manifests to the cluster. In this case, the most important information is the description of the structures used as parameters and responses (the Kubernetes Resources).

Because of this specificity, we realized that it would be difficult to adapt the `swagger-ui` interface to satisfy the users of the Kubernetes API.

## Markdown pages

> The second stage of the project has been to adapt the work I had done to create the k8sref.io website, to include it in the officiel documentation website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second stage of the project has been to adapt the work I had done to create the k8sref.io website, to include it in the official Kubernetes documentation.
```

The main changes have been to:
- use go-templates to represent the output pages, so non-developers can adapt the generated pages without having to edit the generator code

> - create a shortcode, to easily create links from inside the website to specific pages of the API reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- create a new custom [shortcode](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/), to easily create links from inside the website to specific pages of the API reference
```

- improve the navigation between the sections of the API reference
- add the code of the generator to the Kubernetes GitHub repository containing the different reference generators

> All the discussions and work done can be found on [this Pull Request](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/23294).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the discussions and work done can be found in website [pull request #23294](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/23294).
```

> The Pull request to add the code of the generator to the Kubernetes GitHub repository is [this Pull Request](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/reference-docs/pull/179).

Reviewer: maybe:
```suggestion
Adding the generator code to the Kubernetes project happened in [kubernetes-sigs/reference-docs#179](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/reference-docs/pull/179).
```

> Here are the features of the API Reference included in the official documentation website:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the features of the new API Reference to be included in the official documentation website:
```

- the resources are categorized, in the categories Workloads, Services, Config & Storage, Authentication, Authorization, Policies, Extend, Cluster. This structure is configurable with a simple [`toc.yaml` file](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/reference-docs/blob/master/gen-resourcesdocs/config/v1.20/toc.yaml)

> - each page displays at the first level the associated resources, for example Pod, PodSpec, PodStatus, PodList

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- each page displays associated resources at the first level ; for example: Pod, PodSpec, PodStatus, PodList
```

> - each resource inlines its definitions (except when definitions are common to several resources, or are too complex to be displayed inline)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- most resource pages inline relevant definitions; the exceptions are when those definitions are common to several resources, or are too complex to be displayed inline. With the old approach, you had to follow a hyperlink to read each extra detail.
```

- some widely used definitions are documented in a specific page (ex ObjectMeta)
- required fields are indicated, and placed first
- fields of a resource can be categorized and ordered, with the help of a [`fields.yaml` file](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/reference-docs/blob/master/gen-resourcesdocs/config/v1.20/fields.yaml)

> - maps fields are indicated (ex pod.spec.nodeSelector is map[string]string, instead of object) using the value of `x-kubernetes-list-type`

Reviewer: - `map` fields are indicated; for example,  the `.spec.nodeSelector` for a `Pod` is `map[string]string`, instead of `object`) using the value of `x-kubernetes-list-type`

- patch strategies are indicated
- `apiVersion` and `kind` display the value, not the `string` type
- on top of the page, the Go import necessary to use these resources from a Go program is displayed

# Appreciation

> I would like to thank my mentor [Zach Corleissen](https://github.com/zacharysarah) and the lead writers [Karen Bradshaw](https://github.com/kbhawkey), [Tim Bannister](https://github.com/sftim) and [Qiming Teng](https://github.com/tengqm) who supervised me during all the season. They all have been very encouraging and gave me tons of great advices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I would like to thank my mentor [Zach Corleissen](https://github.com/zacharysarah) and the lead writers [Karen Bradshaw](https://github.com/kbhawkey), [Tim Bannister](https://github.com/sftim) and [Qiming Teng](https://github.com/tengqm) who supervised me during all the season. They all have been very encouraging and gave me tons of great advice.
```

---
layout: blog
title: "GSoD 2020: Improving the API Reference Experience"
date: 2020-12-04
slug: gsod-2020-improving-api-reference-experience
---

**Author**: [Philippe Martin](https://github.com/feloy)

> # Introduction

Reviewer 2: @feloy , You should use H2 headings in the page.

[Google Season of Docs](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs) brings open source organizations and technical writers together, to spend three months working closely during the autumn on a specific documentation project.

> 

Reviewer 2: nit: You could leave out "during the autumn". I think GSOD runs at different times of year.

I was selected by the CNCF organization to work on the Kubernetes documentation, specifically on the subject of making the API Reference documentation more accessible.

I'm a software developer, with a great interest in documentation systems. At the end of the 90's, I wanted to invest my time in the Linux community and started translating Linux-HOWTO documents. From one thing to another, I learned about documentation systems and finally wrote a Linux-HOWTO, to help document writers learn the language used at this time for writing documents, LinuxDoc/SGML.

> 

Reviewer 2: 💯

Shortly after, the DocBook language was adopted to write the Linux Documentation. I helped some writers rewrite their documents in this format, for example the Advanced Bash-Scripting Guide. I also worked on the GNU `makeinfo` program to add the DocBook output, making possible to transform *GNU Info* documentation into Docbook. 

## Background

The [Kubernetes documentation website](https://kubernetes.io/docs/home/) is built with Hugo from documentation written in Markdown format in the [website repository](https://github.com/kubernetes/website), using the [Docsy Hugo theme](https://www.docsy.dev/about/).

> The existing API reference documentation is a large HTML file generated from the Swagger specifications of the API, added to the content of the website.

Reviewer 2: To be fair, it may be nice to say that you worked with [started working with] the current API reference.
Instead of focusing on "drawbacks", how about focusing on what you wanted to achieve [your goals].
Something like:
- build individual Markdown pages for the main Kubernetes resources
- reuse the website's assets and theme to build, integrate, and display the reference pages
- create reference pages that are more mobile friendly and accessible to search engines
- create reusable reference content

> The existing API reference documentation is a large HTML file generated from the Swagger specifications of the API, added to the content of the website.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The existing API reference documentation is a large HTML file generated from the Kubernetes OpenAPI specification.
```

- add the code of the generator to the Kubernetes GitHub repository containing the different reference generators

All the discussions and work done can be found in website [pull request #23294](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/23294).

Adding the generator code to the Kubernetes project happened in [kubernetes-sigs/reference-docs#179](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/reference-docs/pull/179).

Here are the features of the new API Reference to be included in the official documentation website:

- the resources are categorized, in the categories Workloads, Services, Config & Storage, Authentication, Authorization, Policies, Extend, Cluster. This structure is configurable with a simple [`toc.yaml` file](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/reference-docs/blob/master/gen-resourcesdocs/config/v1.20/toc.yaml)
- each page displays associated resources at the first level ; for example: Pod, PodSpec, PodStatus, PodList
- most resource pages inline relevant definitions ; the exceptions are when those definitions are common to several resources, or are too complex to be displayed inline. With the old approach, you had to follow a hyperlink to read each extra detail.

> - some widely used definitions are documented in a specific page (ex ObjectMeta)

Reviewer 2: possible edit: some widely used definitions such as `ObjectMeta` are documented as an individual page?

- required fields are indicated, and placed first
- fields of a resource can be categorized and ordered, with the help of a [`fields.yaml` file](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/reference-docs/blob/master/gen-resourcesdocs/config/v1.20/fields.yaml)
- `map` fields are indicated. For example the `.spec.nodeSelector` for a `Pod` is `map[string]string`, instead of `object`, using the value of `x-kubernetes-list-type`
- patch strategies are indicated
- `apiVersion` and `kind` display the value, not the `string` type
- on top of the page, the Go import necessary to use these resources from a Go program is displayed

> When the work is integrated, the API reference will be available at https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/

Reviewer 2: Is there room to add a section about "Lessons learned" or "future work"?

---
layout: blog
title: "GSoD 2020: Improving the API Reference Experience"
date: 2020-12-04
slug: gsod-2020-improving-api-reference-experience
---

**Author**: [Philippe Martin](https://github.com/feloy)

> ## Introduction

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_Editor's note: Better API references have been my goal since I joined Kubernetes docs three and a half years ago. Philippe has succeeded fantastically. More than a better API reference, though, Philippe embodied the best of the Kubernetes community in this project: excellence through collaboration, and a process that made the community itself better. Thanks, Google Season of Docs, for making Philippe's work possible. —Zach Corleissen_

## Introduction
```

- each page displays associated resources at the first level ; for example: Pod, PodSpec, PodStatus, PodList
- most resource pages inline relevant definitions ; the exceptions are when those definitions are common to several resources, or are too complex to be displayed inline. With the old approach, you had to follow a hyperlink to read each extra detail.
- some widely used definitions, such as `ObjectMeta`, are documented in a specific page
- required fields are indicated, and placed first
- fields of a resource can be categorized and ordered, with the help of a [`fields.yaml` file](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/reference-docs/blob/master/gen-resourcesdocs/config/v1.20/fields.yaml)
- `map` fields are indicated. For example the `.spec.nodeSelector` for a `Pod` is `map[string]string`, instead of `object`, using the value of `x-kubernetes-list-type`
- patch strategies are indicated
- `apiVersion` and `kind` display the value, not the `string` type

> - on top of the page, the Go import necessary to use these resources from a Go program is displayed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- At the top of a reference page, the page displays the Go import necessary to use these resources from a Go program.
```

> When the work is integrated, the API reference will be available at https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The work is currently on hold pending the 1.20 release. When the release finishes and the work is integrated, the API reference will be available at https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/.
```

### Future Work

There are points to improve, particularly:

> - some Kubernetes resources are deeply nested. Inlining the definition of these resources makes them difficult to understand

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Some Kubernetes resources are deeply nested. Inlining the definition of these resources makes them difficult to understand.
```

> - the created `shortcode` uses the URL of the page to reference a Resource page. It would be easier for the technical writers if they could reference a Resource by its group and name

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The created `shortcode` uses the URL of the page to reference a Resource page. It would be easier for documentarians if they could reference a Resource by its group and name.
```
